This week, we were invited to view the documentary “AlphaGo - the movie”, and share our opinion on whether move 37 was creative. Before we dive into this particular move, I hope to explore the concept of creativity, as I found myself surprised by my difficulty to define what it means for something to be creative. I challenge us to examine the dichotomies: imaginative vs original, novelty vs meaningfulness, ability vs intentionality, paradigm vs absolute classification.
The first dichotomy contrasts an introspective or extro​spective view on creativity. I will explore this difference through an example: let’s imagine I was challenged to be creative when preparing a presentation, so I chose a different approach to the ones I took before and animate my slides. On the one hand, I can state my product is creative, because I did not find direct inspiration from my or someone else’s previous work (focus on my internal knowledge). Conversely, I can argue that the creativity of my project depends on how rare it is amongst the possible presentation options (focus on external reality).
The second dichotomy brings to our attention the matter of meaningfulness. If I write a very long sequence of arbitrary characters, can I classify it as creative? What if I raise my left arm, put on full foot fins, start spinning and sneeze, am I creative then? Some definitions put forward the point of meaningfulness and value as a necessary characteristic for creativity. In my eyes, this comes hand in hand with the question of intentionality and the third dichotomy. Many phenomena are novel, like species evolution, but can one say that nature or plants are creative on the sole grounds of their novelty and value? Or is creativity bound by active intention and effort?
Lastly, the fourth dichotomy focuses on the idea of duration of status. I want to establish a parallel with a scientific paradigm, whose status is ensured with a consensus of the relevant community of experts and then abandoned. Similarly, it can be argued that creativity must not be an absolute, inherent characteristic of something, but an agreed recognition of the originality and suitability amongst the relevant community (the class, the data scientists, or the GO pro players and commentators).
The Standard Encyclopedia of Philosophy skilfully summarises Berys Gaut’s view on creativity as follows: “Creativity is a disposition—involving both the ability and the motivation—to produce things that are new and valuable.” My own views on each of these dichotomies align well with this definition, which gives the reader a good starting point when moving into my final verdict on whether move 37 was creative. Move 37 was a result of skillful and intentional efforts (computational power and efficient iterations of a costly program developed for over two years), which was novel (evoked great surprise and questioning amongst the GO community, namely the best players and commentators) and valuable (eventually led to the AlphaGo’s victory against the world’s best GO player Lee Sedol). So, yes, move 37 was indeed creative.
Berys Nigel Gaut, & Kieran, M. (2018). Creativity and philosophy. Routledge, Taylor & Francis Group.
Paul, E. S., & Stokes, D. (2023, February 16). Creativity (E. N. Zalta & U. Nodelman, Eds.). Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy; Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/creativity/