The Argument from Consciousness
        Alan Turing was a British mathematician and logician whose contributions credited him as the father of modern computer science. His 1950 cornerstone paper Computing Machinery and Intelligence tackles an alternative to the question “Can machines think?” and proposes a test called “The Imitation Game” to measure machine intelligence. This test came to be known as the “Turing Test” and popularly signals the birth of AI study.
        Turing’s introduction of “The Imitation Game” is immediately followed by his addressing of nine main objections to the test. The “Argument from Consciousness” is the fourth objection, and Turing chooses to present it in the words of Professor Jefferson who claims that machines are not comparable to brains, in the measure that they are unable to experience deep human emotions, namely grief, pride, arousal or sadness. This reflection resonates deeply with me, as it has not been achieved/proved that a machine’s description of feelings originates from experience, and not data analysis and replication. Turing states that “This argument appears to be a denial of the validity of our test.” In fact, the question “Can machines think?” appears to emphasise the human-like reasoning, more than the final output. The imitation game clearly acknowledges that machines can take intended pauses or include filler words like “Hum…” before answering to mimic the output of a human, indicating no actual similarity in thought process. In general terms, I accept that the imitation game might successfully test the ability of a machine to mimic human interaction (which is still not clear, as it might actually be testing the ability of interrogators to recognise machine-produced replies), but it still seems to produce no valuable assessment of whether the reasoning is similar, and can therefore be called “thinking”.
        Turing’s defense was a disappointment in my eyes. His main argument focuses on the unfruitfulness of the “Solipsist view”, as to be sure that the machine thinks, one would have to be the machine and feel oneself think, which is not achievable. Therefore, to avoid it, supporters of the argument of consciousness should feel more inclined to accept his test: “I am sure Professor Jefferson does not wish to adopt the extreme and solipsist point of view. Probably he would be quite willing to accept the imitation game as a test.” This comes across as a very clear false dilemma fallacy, meaning that arguing that a (not unique) alternative is good just because the counterpart is worse is fallacious and deceiving.
Furthermore, Turing puts forward a variation of his imitation game, viva voce, with the goal of strengthening the real applicability of the test. Viva voce is a spoken examination that is used to assess someone’s depth of understanding on a topic, and it is commonly applied in academic environments. In this case, convincing someone you have a theoretical understanding of a topic implies that you answer theoretical questions that are seemingly impossible to rehearse without understanding, making for a good form of evaluation. But I strongly believe this comparison has little value, as we are moving from the realm of theoretical understanding to the realm of experience. Convincing someone you experienced something (you played volleyball) might mean you understand the theory (the rules, tactics and usual injuries) and are a good liar, but it provides little proof that you did experience it. For this reason, Professor Jefferson’s argument that machines are unable to experience deep human emotions is not satisfactorily countered by succeeding in the imitation game. And while this might have displeased Turing, this might mean we are in fact stuck on a solipsist view until a better test is designed.
In conclusion, I contest that the argument from consciousness holds as a very strong and fatal objection to the imitation game, which was not successfully countered by Turing. As the validity of this test was discredited, there is no final verdict on whether machines can think.


Note: I interpreted the assignment as a reflection on the paper and the chosen objection, and not as a letter or direct communication to Turing. I hope that was the assignment. Thank you!